Welcome to Afterlives of Ancient Egypt, in which we discuss ancient history and relevant current events. I'm Cara Cooney, and I love to take deep dives into history that are not always possible in academic formats. So let's get started. Welcome to another episode of Afterlives of Ancient Egypt. With me, your host, Cara Cooney,
and today my helpful intellectual sidekick, Amber Myers, and we are going to go on a rip-roaring journey through the meaning and use of the ka, that particular type of soul or spirit. As we like to say, if you ask 18 Egyptologists what the ka means, you will get 18 different answers. Yes. This is not easily understood.
So, you know, we're just trying to figure out what this is all about. But first, let me just say thank you to all of our supporters. We are like Egyptology Public Television, and we are grateful that we have so many paid supporters, which allows you to take part in our live Q&As. And so we're grateful.
So if any of you can pull out that $5 a month to support this work, we do it in addition to our day jobs. This is a labor of love. This is nothing but that. We're not getting awesome Hollywood contracts from our little podcast.
It's just us trying to figure out the ancient world so that we know what the hell is going on in the modern world, because that's how we see um the world best by looking through the past lens so um that that being said let's
get back to the car and well wait wait wait can i can i ask you is do you want to
tell people what you've been up to at all before we jump in you have anything Because we released an episode or two by the time this is out, but do you want to say anything about what the end of 2025 was for you, beginning of 2026? End of 2025,
from October to December, I just tried to write and write and write the Nefertiti book. So from June until October, I was reading everything I could and researching and doing all of those things. The spring before that were classes based on... Akhenaten and Amenhotep III, which, you know,
was super interesting and got me back into some of the literature, but I was still chair of the department and wasn't able to really put my full brain attention to it. But the last year has just been immersing myself in the Amarna world. Also not using the word Amarna much because I realized it's something that has to
be explained and it's a very jargony word. So I try to just avoid the word of Marna throughout the Nefertiti book, which is strange, right? Not an Egyptological thing, but it works better for her story. So I finished that and turned it in beginning of January.
And now I've got the edits back and I'm going to go through line by line and reorganize things and try to make the narrative tighter, more interesting, make it flow. The fictional sections are fire. Yeah, people stay tuned. There's a fictional section for each chapter and it's like,
I can't believe sometimes what's in there and I fucking wrote them. So, you know.
Yeah. You don't have a release date yet, but we can let people know.
I mean, I think it's going to be 2027. It's going to be longer than any of us would like because these books, they take a while to get organized for everyone to check everything. The editing process is long and So, you know, I'm in the middle of all of that, but it's good.
But now that I'm not writing to the empty page, I can take a breath and do some podcasts because we really did take a break, didn't we, Amber? Yes.
Yes, we did. And so, but as you always point out, you know, we have to do this in the, or we don't have to, we like to do this in addition to our regular day jobs. And you had the task cut out for you there for a while. So...
It was best for everyone involved that you focus on the task at hand.
When I'm already multitasking, it's easier for me to fit this in. But when I'm trying to focus on one thing and really, you know, writing fictional sections, that's hard. And it demands an immersion that academic work does not necessarily demand a focus and attention. So I needed to just be like, everyone go away.
Um, so that I could go into my hidey hole of self-doubt and shame and just write. I don't know what it is for other people, but that's what it is for me.
I'm sure there are writers out there who would very much sympathize and relate to what you have to say on that.
Crazy. But so we're moving on to the next stage. I'm not saying it will be easier. It will be different. And that's okay. That's a coffee. I don't drink coffee. That's a matcha.
Yeah, well, I'll drink enough coffee for the both of us. We're good. Fully caffeinated. Yeah, but as you were saying, so this is the second in the series of episodes that we're doing on the ancient Egyptian aspects of the soul,
right?
By the time this episode comes out, we will have released an episode on the Ba. And today, as you mentioned, we will be talking about the Ka.
Yeah.
But before we dive into that, should we remind people at the top of the episode so that people don't have to listen to them in order? Just remind them like of the, we decided seven aspects will be discussed, even though it's definitely a topic of debate as to how many aspects of the ancient
Egyptian soul there were or how they saw it. So should we list the seven really quick?
What are the seven? We're not doing nine. There are nine in some Egyptological constructs, but we're going to keep it to seven.
Yes, so we decided to stick with seven. So we've already released the episode on the Ba. Today we're discussing the Ka. Then there's the Ach, the Ren, or Naim. eeb which is the heart shoot the shadow and hot the corpse or the body right that
all of them yeah i like that you don't even try for off you're like and we'll get
there when yeah yeah it's true what i mean that will be that will be a great discussion that's all i have to say about that yeah yeah i've been preparing my
whole life for that one i feel like it's kind of funny I know. Yeah. Buckle up people. Here we go. It's true. So I guess we start with definitions. Yeah, sure. You sent me a, I mean, I have my Falconer here, but you sent me the screenshot. So let's, let's look at that.
Yeah. Let me share my screen. So people watching the video version of the podcast will be able to look at what you're looking at, which is a little screenshot from Falconer.
And Faulkner is a dictionary of Middle Egyptian that beginning students use and that Egyptologists continue to use. Nice English translation.
All right. Let's see if I can turn this into, there we go. All right. Do you have a full screen now?
Do I do.
I can see it.
Yeah.
Okay.
All right. So, yeah, we start with some basic translation, which is soul, spirit, essence of a being. So we learn right away that it can be a human being, or it can be an animal being, or it can be a god. So there's many entities that can have this ka.
We have the word personality, that ka ka is somehow more specific to a particular being. um fortune that's that's really interesting like and and i want to return to that because i have my own translations obviously right um but fortune like being the
the blessings that you've been given by the gods in a sense like this is this is the good shit that you get The will of a king, it's very associated with power, very much associated with power. And Amber and I are going to delve more deeply into the origins of the ka and
really go to etymology and discuss what we think is happening there. Goodwill, that's an interesting take. I'm going to say that's a spin, but we'll come back and look at that idea of goodwill. And then phantom or ghost, that's... That's interesting. It's like it's a... It's from the shipwrecked sailor.
Yeah, so this phantom island, it's like an island of spirits. Like it's an island of... But it's an island... I don't know if that's a translation I would use, because it could also be an island of materiality, as you and I have just discussed. Or abundance. The abundance, exactly.
But when he goes to the island, he's like, there's sycamore figs and there's not sycamore figs. And there's this kind of resin and there's that kind of resin. And it's like a place of awesomeness. And I think... A place of blessings. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. So this idea of fortune and blessings, I think, is important.
Now, here we're going to get into some more... etymological stuff, but the idea of kahu being food or offerings, I think is important. Yeah, absolutely. That will be part of the discussion for sure. Yeah, it will. So I guess we'll leave it there for now. But let's look at ka, bul, as being the origins of it.
What do you think, Amber?
Yeah, I think that would be great. But just before we do that, can we, because this is a deeper part of the discussion. So if we were going to try to explain to people, like if you were teaching an undergraduate class or whatever, and you just needed to give students an idea of this concept of the Ka,
would you say you might describe it as something that the Egyptians saw as a life force or anything? an animating type of force? Just to give people something to hold on to as we jump deeper into the discussion.
Yeah. It's so often associated with offerings and with food that there seems to be a physicality to it. So... I have a hard time with talking about it as a personality. I think life force is a good one because it means that you need to eat to live.
It also, as we'll see when we get to, as you see on the screen, you see bull, which is sexual. And then there's a female version, cot, which means vagina. And so there's a feminine variation and you get the understanding that The bull is penile and the cot is obviously vaginal.
And so we have a sexual notion as well. And your life force can then create more life, right? So the idea that the ca... so much of what we know about the cause from underworld texts or texts of revivification after death. And so we see the car being used to remake someone after they've been dead and,
and how there's a sexual component to that. There's a food offering component to that, but you need to feed it or it cannot live.
Right. Right. So we know of the ancient Egyptians on, offering to the call of the deceased, providing offerings, which I guess the idea would be that the, this call of the deceased would be able to partake of the call or the life force within the offerings, because obviously, they wouldn't see these offerings physically go right or disappear.
but they were considered vital to continue to keep this caw going in the afterlife, right?
The way that I've understood it, and maybe take the screen share away for now, is that the caw When a ka of a being, whether it's a god or a person, feeds off of the offerings, they're feeding off the ka of the offerings.
So they're feeding off of the ka of the bread or the ka of the beer. And so there's this mind trick in understanding that there's an essence or a power within you and me, within the tree. It's kind of like an animism. Yeah, within everything that sustains life, right? Yes. Yeah.
So the Egyptians had a rich understanding of the spirit world that did not necessarily manifest into physicality, that you had to pull into physicality. You had to make that physicalness happen. To be in a human body is a special and unusual thing.
To have the bull that you can sacrifice to the god is a special and physical thing. So the Ka, in a way, it's like it's immaterial, but it's also... In my opinion, the most material, one of the most material of all of the.
The call of the deceased needed a body to consume, right? To be able to be sustained.
Or to dwell within. Exactly. It had to dwell within something. And other bodies to consume. So bodies didn't have to die for that.
An image of the deceased. Like I've, I've always thought of it. I mean, we mentioned things like cost statues, but. We know that the ancient Egyptians always were in favor of these contingency plans because something could go wrong with, say, the body itself or the coffin or whatnot. So there were actually many images of the deceased.
Let's say if you took a typical burial, elite burial, probably because we're talking about people that had the things to be buried with. And in theory, tell me what you think of this, I've always thought of it as they saw the kaa as capable of inhabiting any of these images.
Because if the body or the coffin were destroyed or obliterated, they had these contingency images that could then provide their kaa with the ability to be sustained through offerings.
Yeah. So let me... I mean, we're probably going to talk about the kaa of the king later, the devil of the king. Okay, so let me go to a deeper etymology of... of where I think this is going. And people are going to get butthurt and upset, some people. I don't know. Let's see.
But when you think of the ka, and you look at one of the oldest forms of that word, it is the bull, right? And so I actually want to put this into, like, I just saw a really interesting take on Substack, which is that when you're thinking of the word capitalism,
you have to think of the word kappa, head. And when you talk about heads, you're talking about herding. You're talking about heads of cows, heads of sheep. And you're talking about a herding that demands a harem, H-A-R-E-M, that demands a haremification of your herd. There is only one male and there are many females.
right and that it works best that way for economic reasons and then when you're an owner of bulls and you manage and control all of these bulls as a herder the number of bulls is your power so if you have 200 head of cattle you are a very powerful man how many bulls you have um is is
equal to your power as well. Having too many bulls can be a problem. You would have to separate those herds, right? You could have multiple bulls, but they would have to be a herd here and a herd there. You cannot have them together. They're going to compete with one another. But essentially,
if the cause representative of the bull, it's representative of the masculine body that can monopolize. It's representative of the feminine body that can be multiplied and exploited. um all of the cot with the t and and essentially it's its value is based on numbers
as we're going to see in some of the texts and it's patriarchy it's an understanding in my mind as patriarchy and what do the egyptians do and what do humans do to veil the idea of i rich man many many cows you know Because it's too base. It's something that people are like, wait, that's not fair.
People don't like unfairness, though they live with it every day. They veil it in ideology. And they make this idea of the Ka into a spiritual power kind of thing rather than the base money value or physical power. I have many cows. What do you have?
Yeah. Yeah. Well, and it's interesting that modern Egyptology in a way has spiritualized the idea. It's taken that sexual aspect out of it because as you're talking there and you're talking about that origin of the word ka and that meaning bull, we've discussed earlier on this podcast about the origins of ancient Egyptian religion in African bull cults.
Yeah.
Right. Specifically the work of scholars named Loban and Schwaba, and they... make the connection, right? They make that argument very clear. And so if you start in that place and as you're doing following the bull and the importance of male sexual creativity in ancient Egyptian religion,
things start to click in a way that I think on a surface level in modern Egyptology, wouldn't necessarily immediately catch on.
Yeah. Yeah, I agree. And then you get ideas like, can you put the Faulkner back up? Oh, yeah. I know it's hard to go back and forth.
No, it's good. It's easier this time because I actually prepared a few PowerPoint slides. So I tried, I try to make it easier.
Because look what you have there at the bottom. You have cot, work or construction. So now we're abstracting it. We're saying like, let's say if ca is like masculine power. I know it's a patriarchal power, right? Because it's not just masculinity. Not all men get to have this power. Only a few men get to have this power.
The top 2%, the top 1%, right? So if we're talking about patriarchal power, it is like caught... feminized, abstracted, is that which is of the patriarchy. And what is of the patriarchy? But monuments, work, construction. What does patriarchy make you do? Let me tell you, hunter-gatherers, they get to rest all day long, right? They're not working.
This idea of beating someone to work or beating someone to wake up at 4 a.m. to make sure the cows are milked, this is a patriarchal construct. And so the idea of work Like, I wonder if there's a word for beating.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, and again, emphasizing the creative potential and the creative nature of this car. Yeah.
What does it create? It creates work. Yay. And, and we should not be surprised by these things, but it's, it's very interesting, very interesting to see. Yeah, I'm just looking at other words that have ka in them. And this is a loose exercise, right? I mean, we're not going to try to build linguistic understanding,
but we have ka-i, a boat of a Nubian type. which is interesting. What else does patriarchy build but the ability to collect taxes and build boats of extraction, perhaps? Maybe that's too far.
Yeah, a collection, a container, like it amasses. Yeah.
Kauti are the workers. And then we get a lot of other... I'm going to stop with other consonants being added. to this, but it would be interesting for, you know, how do we understand the word work, taught as work or construction, craft, profession? Yeah. Anyway.
Yeah, yeah, it is. Like we were saying, you can really get yourself falling down a rabbit hole pretty quickly with these discussions. And we're, as you point out, shooting from the hip here, we're just making this a bit of an intellectual exercise.
What's your next slide?
So, oh, well, I had pulled, I don't know, is it going to let me? Oh, here we go. I had pulled Ren, but we are going to save that for another day. Oh, okay. But I had pulled some other images. You mentioned earlier about the Ka being a double. This is a line drawing. I'm sorry,
I don't know exactly where this relief is from, but you have the god Khnum, the ram-headed god Khnum here, and you have him forming a person on his potter's wheel and this person's Ka, so their double.
Mm-hmm. It could be from countless mummies, and I'm not sure.
Yeah, well, and I pulled another one. This one's later. I don't know how easy it is to see, but this is Dendera. And it's interesting here, there is a Hecate here, the frog-headed goddess Hecate here, assisting gnome. So it depends regionally. Whether or not there's a goddess there and who that goddess might be.
But again, this is a very physical kind of idea, right? Like a person and a person's cop being formed on a potter's wheel, right? And then I think... We have in ancient Egyptian texts, this idea that the Ka is brought into being by the will of Ray. And so there's a lot of divine infusion going on here.
But at this point, do you want to jump into this discussion of this material aspect of the Ka?
Yeah. And let me start with the idea, two things. One, we learned that cot or work is also craft and knoom is a potter, right? Pottery is something you don't get until patriarchy is well and truly established. And you're now hoarding goods. You're keeping goods and making more than you need and then maintaining storage thereof.
So you need pottery vessels to do that. And to maintain your everything's about money keeping things and also creating
hierarchy right because you have lower quality pottery and higher quality pottery
and you know so once you've hoarded all your what do you do with it you hand it off you have a place to put it but also you have to have a next generation To give it to. So that you're not just one. You are legions. And we will see this in the text about the Ka.
That you have millions of Ka's. That your lineage goes on exponentially forever without ceasing. So that you can maintain control of your shit. for forever. So it is quite material, but then it gets, when it's abstracted, it's abstracted in a sense of forever control through bodies that never cease.
And Canoom making that body again and again and again. And the king then having the double, right? So there's always somebody ready to come in. He's always gonna have another after him. The king is dead, long live the king. And the lineage, or at least the fictive ideal of that,
power and control of patriarchal hoarding of excess resources will continue forever. Yeah,
well, and then there's also a bit of a debate about where is the ka when a person is alive? Where is it when they're deceased? Because in some ancient Egyptian texts, they describe death as going to your ka, right? So that implies a kind of separation that in life, maybe your ka is not
like right here, but it's somewhere, right? And you must be connected in some way because then after death, you where it is, you go there, right? So that's an interesting aspect as well.
I love that because it brings up a sort of prosperity gospel of how the Ka works. that if you're going to be talking about money and goods and sex and lineage and hoarded resources moving down the generations, then you want to claim that these things are God-given and that they have a spiritual essence to them.
So this idea of the Ka coming from the gods As a spiritual essence, that's where we get this idea of fortune, right? The gods have bestowed this blessing upon you. And I see that as another idealization of this very worldly concept.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, and I just want to, while I have the screen share up, I wanted to throw up a couple of other images because, we do know of in the middle kingdom, we call them soul houses as Egyptologists. But essentially, there's a period in ancient Egyptian history where it seems that they were creating
these physical places for a Kha to dwell and to partake of material things.
Right.
And we mentioned call statues and this sort of thing. And definitely the elite have more of an ability to be able to create those things and to have those things and to take them with them into their burial, whatever that might look like.
But then we also, so I was actually thinking about this when I was pulling this image. I was like, these soul houses, these houses for the call. If you look at this, it... If you were going to compare it to other things, like this looks relatively inexpensive. I think I'm sure it probably costs something, but relatively inexpensive.
It's not a beautiful, tall Kha statue that you might find in an old kingdom tomb. And I also was thinking of the idea of false doors because that's also a way that you can present offerings to the deceased and presumably they're caught.
So is this like a poor man's false door and a tool, something that's affordable for them? that they can use for this spiritual purpose. And for those that need reminding, this is for those watching the video podcast that need reminding, this is, I just pulled an Old Kingdom false door from the Metropolitan Museum of Art website here.
And so it's just, as I said, a place that people could go to make offerings to the deceased. But obviously this is something made of stone, beautifully painted. This is going to cost something that not everyone might be able to afford.
Yeah, and when you look at tombs and you're a tourist and you go to Saqqara or Giza and you look at an elite tomb and you see one of these offering scenes or a false door and the deceased sitting before the offerings, all of these things, it's like a magical, a physicalized magical complex to maintain Ka power.
If you like. So how do you keep your body going? How do you keep your sexual self going? How do you keep your lineage going? How do you keep your your own goods going? And it gets quite literal is particularly in old kingdom tombs. You have different iterations in Middle Kingdom and New Kingdom.
tombs but in the old kingdom tomb you see like the the scene of the cows um you know being herded and controlled and maybe a cow being born in one of those scenes you see scenes of of harvesting of of agricultural goods you see the deceased as a
living being um watching his his goods be counted in some sense and and then he sits before a table of offerings like we have here with abundance and plenty and that is magically then reified for the tomb owner and that's why it's so masculine it's overwhelmingly masculine yes there are sometimes
tombs for women particularly in the old kingdom that don't have men in them you should look at ann macy roth's work for that but this is a this is a very masculine
um patriarchal endeavor yeah and it's a good point that the the tombs these burials it's a material sustaining of life you know um There is, and I'm sure there was some sort of spiritual aspect to it, but it was a spirituality infused into materiality, right?
That's why I like the word magic better.
Yes. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, absolutely. You can definitely take it that next step.
And the mummified body, which is something that you can't really display that people aren't meant to see is the, the soft, juicy center of the magical. Yeah.
The core of that, that magic. Yeah. And also in many ways where the, where it's all focused, right. Where hopefully it's being pulled to ultimately. So I think we also wanted to talk about this idea of just ancient Egyptian religion in general. Let me stop the screen share right here.
It was a religion that wanted to make the abstract material, right? It wanted to make the material abstract. Yes. Yeah. Right. And the Ka is a really great example of that because it needs, it's spiritual, but it needs this materiality to be sustained, right? It needs a physical form. It needs offerings of some sort. It needs nourishment.
and end sustainment. So I don't know. Do we want to jump into autism here? Because... Well, wait, not yet.
Not yet. Let's go in order because I have some pyramid texts.
Oh, yes. Yeah, yeah.
Pull those up. Let's do pyramid texts. And then I have some coffin texts. And then we'll do a big shebang with autonism because I think you're... Kara,
throw in the curve ball at me actually going in order. Here I am prepared to just like bob and weave and now we have order. What?
So I just looked at Pyramid Texts Online, which is a wonderful website and you can... It's the Pyramid Texts of Unis. And there are all kinds of things online, but I just... That's where I went. And so... I'm looking at utterance 214 and we have, oh, Unis, beware of the lake to say four times.
So we know it's a magical spell, right? So there's a lake, I suppose, a lake of fire, something you have to be careful. And you have to say this four times. The messengers of your Ka have come to you. The messengers of your father have come to you. The messengers of Ray have come to you.
And you say that four times, and that's going to protect you from this lake of fire or some sort of dangers. But we have the ka equated to the father, equated to Ray, the sun god. And I really like that in terms of lineage, owning and controlling and passing on your hoarded goods and your hoarded power.
And kingship, right? The call of the kingship passes from one king to another. And this is a way of maintaining that power even in death. Right. You have died. Your body does not work, but you you still and you've created this false body or this this effigy body that the car can be in.
So you're able to go into the next world and maintain this car power. And the magic of it is not just for the one who has died, but for the one who is burying. Because who's speaking this? It's almost certainly the one who's been invested as the next king.
So he is going to be there investing his father with this power and thereby will he be imbued with that same patriarchal power. So it is very much about it.
So you could make an argument that this is perhaps one of the origins of this idea that the one who buries inherits.
Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. And the cop being a sexual thing.
Yeah, well, and this connection with lineage that you bring up, I think is important because this sexual creation is also a lineage. It's genetics, right?
Yeah. For those of you that have... The first time you have a baby, it's like a weird magical alien appropriation of your body that you just can't... I would not have called it magical care. I went to alien appropriation, didn't I? Okay, alien appropriation. Yes, okay.
It's this crazy thing that you have sex and then you get pregnant and then you have this baby. It's like new life from nothing. It is a miracle that sustains... And let me tell you, you do feel like a vessel. Yes. I'm sure that enslaved peoples of the American South felt just the same.
And I'm sure the slaveholders and enslavers of the American South felt just the same. That if they could keep the sexual aspect of their enslaved peoples, they could miraculously multiply their enslaved workers and create legions properly. more power I want to put it in those like when you're hurting humans that's what
we're talking about and the Egyptians then turn this into a beautiful spiritual fortune blessed prosperity gospel kind of world but it's also about sex creating new life that's going to do work for you in some way so there's a dark side to
everything way to take the romance out of it Kara like Come on.
So true. Okay, so there's another one in utterance 215. And it's at the end of that utterance. And we have here, where should I start? Your arms are those of Hopi and Duamutef. These are the two of the four sons of Horus, which you need to ascend to heaven. And you ascend.
Your legs are those of Imseti and Kevexenuef, which you need to descend to the lower heaven. So we have the four sons of Horus, like arms and legs, like they're a part of your body. Okay, fine. All your members, your arms and your legs, are those of the twins of Atum, oh imperishable one.
You do not pass away. Your ka does not pass away. You are a ka. So the last part has this big, bold statement. You are a ka. So it's like the ka is this ability to make money grow on trees, to move around at will, to be reborn as you like, and to be imperishable, right? Yeah. Yeah.
That's interesting. Do you have another pyramid text?
I do. Utterance 2 on 8 from Unes. There is no one who withdraws because he will have no bread. His cow will have no bread. His bread will be withheld from him. Geb said, and it came forth from the mouth of the Ennead, hawk after he has seized his own.
So they said, lo, you are insouled and powerful. But The latter part isn't important. The part that's important is that if he has no bread, his ka has no bread. So the bread, which is also the patriarchal agricultural product par excellence, is very much associated with the ka and ka power. And that's gonna be a thread.
It's about sex, but it's about bread. It's about the bull. All of those things are controlled by somebody who has strong ka power.
Yeah, it's interesting how that grain aspect plays into religion throughout time and across cultures.
It is so true. The money that grows on trees, right? Let me see if I have any more. Oh, I like this one. So we're in utterance. 25 and we're in the sarcophagus chamber so it's more about this is unus again still
unus yeah okay all of this is unus um and it's all transformation of of the body so utterance 25 starts with he goes who goes with his car chorus goes with his car seth goes with his car thoth goes to say four times he goes who goes with his car
Um, what do you, what do you want to do with that? Like the one who's able to move was able to,
I, yeah, what I take from that is this, we mentioned it earlier, this idea of a journey to the car or with the car or going to the, you know what I mean? There's a, another physical aspect to it. It's not just a body and material offerings. It's also physical space. Um,
Like a crossing of a distance, a journey of some kind.
And that you need this divine force to help you do it. You can't go without this.
It's agency, right? Because movement is agency. So it's not just a life force that is in one place and sustained, but it seems like a one direction. kind of thing in our discussion of the ba we talked about it's much more of an idea
of something that can move around maybe a little bit more freely but i don't know this idea that we're picking up on here of the ka and a journey or movement it seems to be unilateral in some way i mean you bringing up the ba just it just
freaked me out i know i'm sorry i'm sorry but i think that that everyone who's listening can can be freaked out with us because these are not things that you know, have hard and fast barriers between them. And what is the difference between a Ka and a Ba is still not something that I understand.
I will bring up a point that I made in the Ba episode, which is we're trying to hash out and understand and extrapolate ancient Egyptian religious theology into Missing like 90 plus percent of the kind of information and texts and just religious primary sources that must have existed.
Right now we can set aside how many people in ancient Egyptian society would have had. access to these initiated texts or knowledge or whatever it might be. But it existed, that acknowledged existed in some way, right? And we don't have it. And so we are in many ways trying to have a deep philosophical or theological discussion,
missing a lot of things. So I think in some ways we have to acknowledge that and cut ourselves a break because It will blow your mind if you try to fit these things together. And wait, how did this work together? And what did it mean? And why did you need this aspect and that aspect?
If I'm going to make it, you know, since we are differentiating as we go, that the bar is more of the personality. It's more of the gender of the person because it's given that little bird is given a male head. A head.
Yeah.
It's a human head. It's not that the car doesn't help you move, but the car is protection as you move, whereas the bar is the agency to move, in a sense. But the bar, I don't know, it's also like kind of a will to live. Or... I don't know.
I feel like we have to revisit the Ba every time. It's a power that's...
And it seems to be something that is even more connected with all of the divine. Because the gods and the deities are said to have Ba's.
And a divine essence and ba-u meaning the power of that device. But anyway, the rest of this text, Utterance 25 and Unas, it ends with, oh, Unas, the arm of your ka is before you. Oh, Unas, the arm of your ka is behind you. Oh, Unas, the leg of your ka is before you.
Oh, Unas, the leg of your ka is behind you. So there's an understanding with this ka of it being a force field as well. a kind of protective space that you are inviolable you you are impenetrable you you are absolutely safe with with this car defended from the front and back and i don't
know if the bar would provide the same the bar is like a fierce power to fight maybe but maybe it's not as protective and sustaining and
Well, I'll say, so it talks about the arm in front of you, the arm behind you, the leg in front of you, the leg behind you. Okay. I just ask because it also just popped into my head, this idea of the ancient Egyptians referring to demons or spirits as having a face turned backward.
Like clearly like directionality, there's a significance to that here. So I'm not sure what to make of it.
Yeah, we have to think about these things. Everyone, think about these things.
Yeah, y'all think about it and get back to us.
I like this one. Also in the burial chamber, where it needs to be to transform the body. This is utterance 36 of Unas. And we have here, the God purifies himself. You purify yourself. Your Ka purifies itself. And then you purify yourself, purify, you purify.
It's one of those things where if you give it to somebody on the exam, you just have the word wab like 18 times. And it's like, good luck translating this. But there is an association of the ka being something that can purify or needs to be purified, just like the body.
It has to be cleaned in a sense. Mm hmm. I don't know what else I can do with that. Okay, utterance 46, another magical, they're all magical spells, but this one gives it more of a magical input because it's to say four times. An offering which the king gives for the Ka of Unas.
Osiris Unas, take the eye of Horus, your cake, which you eat. And then it says underneath, a cake of offering, right? So magical spell, you give the cake of offering. You say it four times, an offering which the king gives for the ka of Unas.
So the king who's burying gives to the king who is being buried a cake and is like, okay, and I'm feeding your ka too, sustaining you, which will sustain you. And then in utterance 50, similar, for your body are all things. For the ka of Unas are all things. For his body are all things.
Glorious altar is then the thing that's meant to be offered. So we have this very material understanding that the ka must be sustained through feeding of actual physical stuff. Which again makes Akhenaten more interesting. Okay. Okay.
We can't go there yet. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I know. Yeah. We'll, we'll get there. We both are eager to get to, uh, uh, get to that. But hey, okay. So you're, as you're reading that there, I'm thinking like four times, four times. When I think of ancient Egyptian religion and numbers, I'm thinking three times, multiplicity, nine times,
infinity, this kind of thing, but four times. Interesting. But what have we been talking about here? So you're saying that these would have been magical utterances made by the alive king, let's say, the king who is burying, to the dead king, the deceased king. So what if it's Ka body of the alive king?
They're both offering to the Ka and the body of the dead king. So there's your four. The double on Knoom's potter's wheel, two and two, are offering... I don't know.
I love that. And I also love it because of the astrology of it, that four is associated with Jupiter and Jupiter is abundance and patriarchal. And that idea of, of, um, Of having that forever material abundance. So that works. And the idea of it being two doubles.
Because four is a different kind of number to see happening, right? In ancient Egyptian religious texts. Like three, okay. Nine, okay. Maybe eight, right? For Thoth and Eight Town and the Ogdawad and that kind of thing. Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, and four is the four directions. Very material.
Very directional. We've already mentioned direction.
You have to protect north, south, east, west, right? And when Egyptians talk about extending the borders or protecting, or when you look at, like I know the edifice of Taharqa and you have to throw the balls in the four directions and you shoot your arrow in the four directions, you're creating that force field of a worldly space.
And what is, ah, and here we'll get even more patriarchal. But when you're talking about the shift from the hunter-gatherer reality to the patriarchal agricultural and herding reality, more agricultural, you're moving from round spaces to square spaces. And patriarchy happens within four walls, right? Those mud brick walls. It's not that round wall. feminine space. It's something different.
There's a lot you could do with the number four. See what happens on a podcast when you're just missing.
Well, and talking about this directional idea and that sort of thing. Remember, we are also talking about an old kingdom context here, a religious context with the pyramid texts that are very much associated with an architectural element. And I think more of a linear context.
direction and as you say not a cyclical whatever this is linear like sky to earth earth to sky realm of the living to realm of the deceased and divinity and this sort of thing so i think it's good to to make a point about where we are in in time
here as well very interesting um should we move on to coffin text
Yeah, we're only in the Middle Kingdom, people. I hope your drive is long because... Let's see.
Okay, so I'm looking at Coffin Text 75, which is all about the boss. It starts out with the boss. And I think we read this last time. I am the boss of Shu, the self-developing God. It is in the body of the self-developing God that I have developed.
I am the boss of Shu, the God mysterious of form. And then... There's discussion of what that could mean. And then going down, I'm using Alan's Genesis in Ancient Egypt. It's a wonderful book. I managed to get my hands on a new copy that's not falling apart, which is awesome.
It doesn't have all my markups, but that's okay. Yeah. But going down to around line 55, 54, we have how I developed was in the God who developed on his own, alone, older than the gods. I am the one who touches for him the height of the sky. I am the one who brings to him his efficacy,
who unites for him his million of ka placed in protection of his associates. So we get it. Some cool things there. So we have protection, which we've already hit on with the Unes Pyramid text. His associates, protection of his associates so that the Ka demands workers, in a sense.
Maybe that's too big a leap, but we'll go with it. And then his million of ka unites the million of ka. So again, we have this idea of the numbers of ka that you have.
Okay, I wonder what the Egyptian is. Is it like nehek en, nehek em? Like what would the preposition be there? For the million of ka? Yeah, I know we can't necessarily go there, but I just,
you know,
prepositions mean different things in ancient Egyptians. So whether it's en or em. That could have a very different connotation.
And I don't know if it's just million and then the number is just an adjective.
Oh, that's true. That's true.
Because there's no way in English to do it. I haven't looked at this coffin text, so we would have to see. But the coffin, this is written on a dead patriarch's coffin, right? A coffin that is meant to... Keep his hoarded wealth, keep his hoarded power,
transform it down the lineage for his living offspring and maintain that power, but in this magical coffin space. And so to have the Ba mentioned and the Ka mentioned in this spell of regeneration, of self-developing from nothing is... Yeah, I mean,
all of these aspects of the soul interplayed and were related to each other in some way. It's just, I don't know, it's not necessarily possible for us to really get into or understand exactly how that happened. And I think that's part of the Egyptological debate.
And so we look at the evidence that we have as we're doing, and we try to see what can be seen. But it's very interesting that clearly they're related and they play in there's an interplay there that must have existed.
Yeah. It's, it's, it's all super interesting. Now I have another coffin text and I'm trying, Oh, here we go. It's another million of costs. So this one is coffin text 261 and it's about the force of Heka, the force of magic and how magic works. And the text is entitled becoming magic.
Is it Hepper Heka or Heka Hepper? I'm not sure. I don't have the Egyptian in front of me, but the text is translated by Jim Allen as Becoming Magic. And then it goes on, O noble ones who are before the Lord of totality, behold, I am come to you.
Be afraid of me in accordance with what you have learned. I am the one whom the soul Lord made before two things had developed in this world when he sent his soul eye, his one eye, when he was alone, when something came from his mouth, when his million of Ka was in protection of his associates.
Same thing again. When he spoke with the one who developed with him, then whom he is mightier, of whom he is mightier. So it's like, To have magic and to create things, maybe Ba is more of a soul of magic, if you like. You have to have the Ka, which is the soul of protection.
It's like the Ka creates the sacred space, the force field, and then you can do your magic therein. It's like, you can't, what do they say? You need money to make money? So you can't do a magical spell unless you have the protection around you. You can't invest to make money unless you have a million dollars already.
So you have your millions of cause all around you, and then you can become magic and do all of these things.
So it's a necessary pre-component for magical... Yeah, so the materiality is a necessary... pre-component for the magic to be able to take place because i think what what we've learned about ancient egyptian religion is is that neither aspect can really exist independently like they they are entwined or they need each other in order to continue.
Yeah. And, and it's Jan Osman who of course says in his death and the afterlife book that, and in other books as well, but that death is a fragmentation of all of these that are in the living body and soul of the human, all of these seven or nine elements are there, um,
united and death then fragments them. Which creates a certain kind of power. Like Osiris's body. Yeah, the body. Fragmented and needs to be pulled back together. From the soul, right? And so, but without that separation and fragmentation and then coming back together again, you don't have the miracle of new life.
And so it's Osiris's body reuniting with the soul of the sun that then brings it all together again. So you get a sunrise every day, right? Which is a magical miracle. instantiation but you have to have that fragmentation so you can then bring it back
together and then fragment and bring it back together it's a constant um push and
pull like the way right because death is a reality it's unavoidable and so you have to write that into the script whatever kind of spiritual or theological script you are writing a human religion always has to deal with that reality that death is a
thing yeah yeah absolutely yeah And speaking of death, we have Coffin Text 647. And here we've got an interesting text. So I'll read the first part. I am the one who makes vegetation grow. Again, let's go patriarchal. We're making some money, right?
Who makes green the banks of the Nile Valley, lord of the highlands, who makes green the wadis. He who is over the Nubians, Asiatics, and Libyans, for the nine bows have been gathered for me, and totality has been given to me by the sun, lord to the limit.
I am south of his wall, that would be patah, sovereign of the gods. And here we are getting to the point. I am king of the sky, distributor of cause, who officiates over the two lands, distributor of cause, who gives baz, manifestations, that would be heparu, cause and beginnings.
I am distributor of cause and they live according to my action. When I wish I make it possible for them to live. There being none of them who can speak to me except for the one who has made that unique identity of mine.
And then it goes, because I am enunciation in his mouth and perception and his belly. And then we go into Alan goes into heck on see on all of this. Yeah. Which is his discussion. But this idea of, distributor of cause who officiates over the two lands.
It's like, you get a car and you get a car and you get a car. Right, right. But not you. And then distributor of cause who gives baas and heparoo cause and beginnings. It's like the ca is the only way you can start.
Yeah. Not with sex. And I, and I think that a lot of the Egyptological thought on that is exactly in that, like they're there, right? With the call that it is, it is the spark. It is a beginning, as you say. So it's not just a life force. It's that spark.
that gets the life force going that then needs to be sustained and so on and so forth. So yeah, absolutely.
And so Alan on page 41, he says, like Pharaoh too, he is conduit through which life energy, parentheses, passes to all living things. So he's saying that, that cause simply the life energy. It's that we can call it a spark of life. I think that's great.
And then that's where you get the materiality of it, that it can be a bull. It can be a feminine aspect. It can be the work, but it's this, it's what the, the life energy is once you start to, but when you start to hoard that, so, so it, you know,
maybe then we don't say that the cause necessarily is, patriarchal in its origins, but it's what the ancient Egyptians made it into. That when you hoard life energy and you manage it such that there is only one bull and there are hundreds of cows and you feed off of that system and pass it down a lineage,
then you patriarchalize it. So it's not that Ka from its essence is patriarchal. It's just life. And it's just what we do with that life. So then I'll pull back a little of my my feminist screed and, and yeah, it's, it's, it's how you manage it.
Yeah, absolutely. And I think that this Highlander aspect that you bring up of there can only be one, you know, convenient and a bolstering idea for patriarchal kingship and rule. So, yeah.
And I think there's some stuff from the Memphite theology, but that's such a difficult text that I think I will leave it for now. And we can move to the new kingdom.
Can we?
I think we can.
Are we ready? Well, where do you want to be in the new kingdom? You have choices. I know, but do you have anything pre-Akhenaten? I think it's the sort of stuff that we've already discussed. Before we get into Akhenaten, we could maybe touch again just on this idea. And in particular, it's ancient Egyptian kingship as a whole,
but in particular, I think our brains at least are sitting in the New Kingdom in many ways. But going back to what we've already discussed previously on this podcast in the Wasp Scepter episode about kingship and the bull, and in particular, the bull as a source of the elements and regalia of kingship,
the bull's spine as a place that the ancient Egyptians saw as the source of the male orgasm, and the role of the different parts of the bull and how it was incorporated into kingship. Yeah. A very material manifestation of the kingship. Can we touch on that?
And then I think Akhenaten might make a little bit more sense if people have this in their brain already. So...
Again, bulls and cows, before they were herded by humans, lived in the wild, and they did not have these harem realities. These harem realities are imposed by humans trying to manifest more wealth, trying to expand the life force and intensify it in a way that demands you kill all the young male
animals in a herd and you maintain only one and there can be only one. So the kingship is an imposed reality that demands growth. It demands control and power. But it ultimately changes what is the life force of the natural world. So
Yeah. And I think going deep time, like this surely started with that, that human observation of bulls and how one male bull would dominate a particular herd or whatnot. And then As you say, there can only be one. And then following on of that huge strength and creative power and the appeal that
would have had as society was coming together, hierarchy forming, patriarchy solidifying. And the monopolization.
Yeah, the four walls being built. It is a monopolization thereof. So, you know, that podcast we did on the Wasp Scepter was just so much fun and work that that was done to remove the the bull glands and penis and to dry it mummify it and
create the wasp scepter and you realize that the set head is a penis and that the king holds it and thereby expresses the king gods goddesses right Son God, you know, but it's their dominion, um, as patriarchs, rarely goddesses. And when, but some, but some goddesses, there's a list. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, and I have Ray type goddesses, right. That, that, um, wield that kind of masculine power.
anthropomorphized in and of themselves, the ankh, the wasps. Yeah. There's some deep stuff there. It really is.
So yeah, you've taken this bull penis, you mummified it, you've gotten the shape and you've created a God out of it that we know of as Seth, right? Right, right. Aardvark like shape. And then you make a hieroglyph abstract out of it. And then you personify it. It sanitizes it. It sanitizes it.
They love that sanitized way of presenting it. Also an initiated way to present it. So if you know, you know, right? If you can read this, you can read this. But that's essentially the point that I want to make about ka and the word ka meaning bull. And then you have ka as the aspect of the soul.
The ancient Egyptians saw this origin of the male orgasm. They associated it with the bull, the bull's spine and this. And so you can then understand where this focus comes from and their, I don't know, maybe obsession with the male orgasm and its creative and life-sustaining potential.
Life-sustaining in this idea of lineage you brought up and being able to create that again and again, or spark life.
Because what's another etymology of ka that we skipped over and people were probably screaming at their devices as we skipped over it. And how is it written? It's written with the arms in an embrace. And so it is an embrace. Not a hug, not like puppies and rainbows,
but a sexual embrace and the cot being the place of embrace. That is it's it means sex, if you like. So it's like, what's your sex thing? Oh, that's my sex thing, the cot. And then this sex thing is the car and it's just sex. And so. Yeah, that moment of spark, that moment of creation.
And it's written with the arms that are holding. And it's arms. It's not anything else. But it's a very human kind of sexual embrace then.
Well, it also, how do you anthropomorphize an Ankh or a Was?
You give it arms. Yeah, you do. You do. So you have the products of the embrace, the Ankh, which I think is the orgasm, right? Embracing. It's very meta.
And the wasps embracing like the wasps gets arms too in some cases. Yeah.
Yeah.
Oh yeah.
That's crazy. It's, it's super interesting. So really it's life force for Alan. It's sex. Pro creative sex. and then what you do with that and how you work it. If you have millions of cause, you have millions of sex moments, and those millions of sex moments have created millions of new life beings that you own,
that are yours, that you bring with you into death.
Yeah, because of everything that has life or everything that can sustain life, such as food or grain or whatnot, if it all has a cause, You need millions of cause to inhabit, to imbue all of those things with that creative life force.
Yeah. Yeah. Do we move on to Akhenaten or where do you want to go? What else is in your slides? That was pretty much it. I did it pretty quick. Okay. So I'm looking at the great hymn to the Aten from the tomb of Ai.
And there's not a whole lot of ka in the text to the Aten, but you and I will have discussions about altars and food and things. And we've had these discussions before. We're going to put it in the context of the ka. But ka here, it's at the beginning of the prayer. So he's setting it up.
He's like, this is why this prayer is in my tomb. This is where I fit. And he negotiates it through the ka. And so we read here, My Lord has taught me, I do his teaching. He's talking, this is I talking about Akhenaten. So he's saying that I am of service.
My Lord has taught me, I do his teaching. I live by worshiping his Ka. I am sated by attending him. My breath by which I live is this north wind, this thousandfold hoppy who flows every day. So we have this idea, and we see this later, as when on earth I followed your ka,
grant that my ka abide and flourish for me. So I has a ka, Akhenaten has a ka, but one ka is following the other ka. You brought up the word hierarchy. And I think that the Ka in the Egyptian mindset, it is an organizing force. Who has more Ka's? Whose Ka can beat the other Ka?
And then your Ka subsumes itself to that other Ka and follows, like a follower of Horus, right? Mm-hmm, yeah. So it's a socially organized.
Because there must have been a hierarchy of cause because the car of bread, for instance, would have had to fall below the car of a human being or a person or the car of an animal. So, yeah, again, a very patriarchal idea baked right in. See what I did there?
Baked. And this idea, so he says, to come before you with offerings, to atten your father as gifts of your car. And so here we have the trap that the Ka provided, because what did Akhenaten do for his god, the Aten, the visible, touchable, feelable sun in the sky? Not the abstract,
hawk-headed dude walking around holding the wasp scepter, but the actual physical sun. He physically fed it stuff. material that was his abundance that needed to be real and nice and good, real bread, real animals that were slaughtered, real onions, real everything.
Well, and divinity, like that became what you could see and feel. And it was, you make, you've made this point of botanism. It brings that materiality, a hyper kind of level and i think based on what we've talked about before as far as ancient egyptian religion and the ancient egyptians wanting to make the abstract or
spiritual spiritual concrete or material if you keep that in mind then otanism doesn't seem like that much of a leap like if you had a philosopher or An ancient Egyptian theologian, this hyper materialism of Atenism doesn't seem so out of left field. It maybe feels that way or like literally looks that way in the art,
but it's almost just, okay, take this, follow this line and just keep going. And this is where Akhenaten took it.
It's the natural endpoint that one has to expect this kind of patriarchal materialism is what to go to.
And I think that it's important to remind people you've already said we have had this previous episode about Akhenaten's obsession, as Barry Kemp called it, with offerings and the just mind-blowing level of offerings and offering tables that existed at Akhenaten. But then also take into account the fact that Akhenaten didn't step away from the bull.
No.
He kept that bull's tail. He kept that regalia, which I think there are Egyptologists who would make an argument for that regalia being sourced from a bull, right? He kept something like the bull's tail for his kingship. And the bull cult, that was at Akhenaten. He didn't step away from that particular aspect. Cha is there.
I'm convinced that the blue crown, red crown, white crown, and he was particularly fond of the blue crown, but that these crowns were, if we did our experimental archaeology and we cut the bull up into parts as they naturally dissected. Came from somewhere, yeah. And then shape them into something that these hats,
these things transformed the king into different aspects of the bull. If we had more of an idea of the anatomy.
Or he allowed him to assume.
you know, the different aspects of the, yes. Like, where's that weird curl in the red crown coming from? I'm sure it's like some weird ligament or some body part that just naturally makes that curl. And then that weird thing standing up in the back, it's like, is that a bone? What's going on?
And then he puts on that part. And if we knew the anatomy where it came from, then it would be like, oh, he's putting on this part. Oh, he's putting on that part. And we just had the ca, you know, this part of the ca and the four directions, you know, the arm and the leg.
is the foreleg when it's cut up and could you turn it into a hat if you taxidermied it? And then which part would it be? He is by no means abandoning that bull cult. He is laying those parts of leather, bone and ligament onto his body.
There's a reason we don't have those crowns preserved because they were of a sacred animal that that granted legitimacy to kingship and were passed on well and also probably
made of organic materials that just did not survive i like to and i've said this
before i like to think of it is when those crowns started to fail and you couldn't mend it anymore then you had to construct a new one it means a new sacred animal had to die a new dissection had to occur a new taxidermy had to happen it's like
When they say in Star Wars, oh, you constructed a new lightsaber. It's like you have to construct a new red crown. That's a big deal. And and that divinity lives on beyond your kingship. But one thing I so going back, you know, reading Alan's translation of Life Force.
helps me to see that one thing that Akhenaten is doing, and again, I agree with you, it's a development from Amenhotep III, from Thutmose IV, from Amenhotep II, and going back down his lineage into the Middle Kingdom, into the Old Kingdom, with all of its ups and downs, its growth and collapses.
But Akhenaten is the most material manifestation of an over-intensification of life force. On every level.
On every level. And coming just after an over-intensification of... People talk all the time about the material excess of Amenhotep III's time, right? This was the world in which Akhenaten was born into.
Yes. And that over-intensification, it's like an over-manipulation. And what I mean by that is nothing natural was allowed to be. So if even within herding systems, if in a herding system, you allow the cow a year of life before you bring her to the bull,
then she is more physically able to receive the semen of that bull and create a healthy pregnancy. If every herder would have known if you bring the cow to the bull too early, You've got problems. You're going to have issues. Akhenaten kept doing this, and he did so, I would argue, with his own offspring,
with his own daughters. And that's why Egyptologists are like, there's no way these girls could have been sexually able at the age of 10 or 11 and have their father's children. I'm like, why not? This falls in line with the alters. It falls in line with his over-intensification of life force. His thought that he could control it
and make it millions and that it would just work. And that is why it's so interesting to me that when you look at the royal tomb and you see Mecca Otten there dead and then next to her, a nurse holding a baby and people are like, oh no, it's not that she died in childbirth. That's impossible.
She was too young. When it fits every other narrative of this story, fits it perfectly. And there's a dead woman with somebody holding a baby next to her. When people tell you what happened, believe them. It's right there. And the amount of dissembling that Egyptologists go through, the pretzels of their minds that they create to say that,
oh no, it's not a baby, like a real baby. It's like the new life force of Meket-Aten being reborn as a baby. And this literal world is not going to do those kinds of things. Akenon is the expression of the over-management. over intensification with diminishing returns and the collapse. Yeah, exactly.
Just it's, it's, it's capitalism applied to the natural environment and natural order of things. It's the same thing that capitalism is doing to the world and human society today. It's just, it's taken on a different patriarchal form today than it had in ancient Egypt.
I also think that's why Akhenaten was obsessed with it being his own children, because he wanted to have children through his Ka lineage. his own lineage. And that kind of material literalism was something that ruled him. So he's like, OK, I need to do it in this way.
Nefertiti was not related to him from all that we can see, but she was a special chosen entity, however that happened, however that worked, in support of his Ka, but also over-intensified in her way. Yeah, this using up of women, this using up of resources, using up of workers.
The discussions by Anna Stevens and Gretchen Dabbs of the worker cemeteries and these people who are over-intensified in terms of their labor helps us to see caught as work, caught that manifestation. And it all fits. It all fits, but it's life force. It's what you do with it.
Yeah. Well, and again, thinking of the great hymn to the Aten, everybody has their task in that. Everyone has their work. Yeah. Yeah. In that theology there.
So yeah. Yeah. Oh, this turned out to be way more fun and interesting than I thought I would be able to do. I'm glad. I'm glad we can entertain you. for for a little while here again there are dissertations to be written here so
everyone oh yeah absolutely well and that's and that's it always my preparation always feels completely inadequate topics that we explore you can you could write dissertations on and spend so much time getting into the existing egyptological literature um
And just looking at the great hymn right now, My Eyes Fall Upon, all of the birds and the bees, like literal life force, right? Trees, herbs are sprouting, birds fly from their nests, their wings greeting your ka. So we have the idea of Aten's ka and all of this new life is for him.
And it's your rays are in the midst of the sea who makes seed grow in women who creates people from sperm who feeds the son in his mother's womb. all about sex, all about stuff, all about things to exploit and intensify.
Well, and if the rays of the Aten are male aspect of creative potential, then there you go. It's all right there. And as you say, people have been way too willing in the past to by the propaganda presented by the sanitized propaganda that the ancient Egyptians were putting out there and not asking themselves, wait a minute, like,
what are we just accepting that they're telling us? We need to start to break out of that. It gets way more interesting when you do. That's for sure. It is. Way more interesting. And there's just something as we have these discussions and such, it's just your human intuition. You start to explore these things and you're just like,
you recognize the humanity in it immediately. You know, it just rings true. And it doesn't, it sounds crazy and yet not at all because it just-
yeah it fits yes yeah it helps you understand everything from epstein to the the current political situation do we need greenland to and who knows when this is released what horrors will have befallen us but it's it's all out there and it's all about the management of life force it's not criticizing the life force its
existence or how the egyptians understand it it's criticizing the human exploitation thereof here
And how do we change it? How do we stop it? I don't know, but I do know that it starts with questioning it.
And when you over-intensify, look what happened to Akhenaten's world. That was not a pretty ending.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Well, and it just... convulsed the society, the religion so much that this tiny little period of what less than 20 years out of centuries upon centuries of ancient Egyptian history plays such a huge role in the way we study and understand ancient Egypt today and just how it's popularly perceived.
Literal icons, the icons of ancient Egypt come from this time.
I think it's why we lay so much on Akhenaten and scapegoat him so completely because it allows us to be apologists for a larger Egyptian system that we love and cherish and not criticize.
Well, just like Trump will be scapegoated. Oh, he was an aberration. We're going to return to what's better or whatever, but it's still patriarchy. It's still this oligarchy dominant class having control over society. It's just under a different name. So yeah.
Awesome. Amber, thank you. This is really fun. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. It was, it was great. So everyone go to Substack, do it right now. Go to Substack, put in Ancient Hour, put in Substack in my name, and you can follow us for free. All of our content is free, completely free. If you become a paid subscriber,
you get to join our live Zooms, which happen quarterly, and you might get swag.
And they can follow you on Substack Notes. You definitely post there. There's the Substack. chat feature that subscribers have access to. And there's a special paid subscribers chat as well. So yeah, if they head over to Substack, they will find you.
Yeah. So if things are all about creating workarounds and you feel like hierarchy is blocking you from further study, this is an option. So consider it and use it. And thank you guys for your attention. And till next time, Amber, what's the name of this podcast? Afterlives of Ancient Egypt. Thanks, everyone. See you next time.
Thank you to our listeners for your support and please subscribe. If you enjoyed the show, share it with all your friends and most importantly, leave us a five-star review. Send all those ancient world questions and topic suggestions for future episodes to ancientnowatsubstack.com. We actually do read them all.
You can find info on all my books, articles, and upcoming lectures on my website. Just head to KarakuniEgyptologist.com. Amber puts all of that together. Oh my God, thank you, Amber. Check out our Substack Ancient Now at ancientnow.substack.com where we share perspectives on all that history and archaeology news every week and continue the
conversations that happen after the podcast mic is turned off. Support the show by becoming a paid subscriber at our Substack Ancient Now community. This keeps the show free for everyone and paid status gives you access to our archives. Thank you to our current supporters. I'm at all the social medias. Look for at Kara Cooney.
Thanks to the team at Patina Productions for this podcast, which I must point out is wholly separate from my academic work at UCLA. See you next time on Afterlives of Ancient Egypt.