## Introduction

Jheliotropic physicair— contracted tuberculosis, ever fight evil with words. But chronic illness never stopped curriculum in literature and philosophy, with their associated mortar which held France's far-flung communities together and in philosophy made a proud and self-confident Frenchman in letters and then a master's in philosophy, with a dissertation AugistintCamuss dissertation supervisor, Jean Grenier, *	*	*	1	* . 1	•	•	A	« • • ■	v,«N m rvr\c enlUk^C/mslkin M«taf)^sics <md j\eo^lal(msyric Plotinus anA»»e»il emtfied-Christian. Metaphysics and, jSeo-Platmsm; Plotmus and Saint supported -himself through all kinds of odd jobs, collecting again in his later work (for example} the strike at the coopers' the Kingdom). As a student, Camus also discovered amateur well received, Camus never stopped being involved in theatdramatic monologue almost ready to be-staged-as it stands in w#y out of poverty and provinciality for Albert Camus was the values that it was built on as well as the techniques that it had. already proved its worth in raising him from the very bottom of the pile. ?iceforth: illiterate and unqualified. r I-Jis mother, Catherine Sintes, had to she became a cleaner. The family had other relatives in , Algeria who were moderately successful, but Camus's personal nowadays. It did not make Camus a bitter or jealous man. background is one of such poverty as can hardly be imagined

text, as if only Europeans could even catch bubonic plague. manhood in Algiers was in journalism, and he spoke out occur to him that the colonial project itself was flawed, even
occur to him that the colonial project itself was flawed, even if he came to fear that it was doomed. After he moved to France in 194°> and long after that, as the situation in of his time, not a far-sighted prophet, and he remained loyal not insensitive to the plight of the Arab population of Algeria. — «	«	«	« «			*	%	■» a

not insensitive to the plight of the Arab population of Algeria. » » i	t	i	it..		i	«	i 1 in the European theatre and the world at large, and he was' could he? Like all the settlers save those who actually managed accurate and sensitive reproduction of the bitxkskm the outbreak of the Second World War, and in its tripartite a plan at the start: "I'm twenty-five, I have a life ahead of me, three key words: The Absurd - RjeuoLt - Low. Of these work of Albert Camus. He became first and foremost the is only the first panel of the triptych Camus envisaged as his profoundly moulded by a particular place and time, we fa, Jth. (JamusTield no religious beliefs, of course. Cut he

and literary edifice of lasting beauty and value. faith. Camus held no religious beliefs. ^course. t>ut he helc 	_ u-i:.r	:j.l. ^	_r-	•	— 'i'Jnc a.osurd is the state of being in the absence of religious faith. Camus held no religiou&~E>eLiet's9 of course, jsut he neici

faith. CJamus held no religious beliefs, of course. ButfirEeT3 faith. Camus held no religious beliefs, of course. MtTe helcz: xfJiTnon-belief with a kind of moral fervour and intellects transcendmgithemurkyiness of human existence, death is an end that undermines tirrvakre of anything that precedes it. because he felt it deeply. Only a god could make human actions meaningful in an absolute sense, and as there was no as there was no Tng. From this Camus drew the conclusion that life was 'absurd'. As he often explained, there is no credible argument that can justify the existence of evil; there is no sophistry that ever lake sense of why bad things happen to nice people project was simply to describe the true Me of our being, to to be alive in a world that is, in his special sense, absurd, That Tead novel, The (teak. The second pan of his plan was to read novel, The Outsider. The second part of his plan was to is devoted to ways of making a human sense of an inhumanly all remarkable - or even more strangely, lamentable - that would surely be far worse if the opposite were the case. If the general and acts in particular would be endowed irrevocably with 'meaning'. And that would make the world a very strange pmature-death, and outbreak of slaughter would be 'meaningful', that is to say fully explicable in terms of a higher order,4nd thi&necessary, Under such conditions, human life, guesses, effort, and surprise, would sorely seem quite futile, since no matter what a person did, it would & it would fk in with, a it would fit in with a higher scheme by the very fact of having been done. A as rather more absurd than one in which meanings are nc chase.

The point that Camus makes "\ti The Mjrth of Sis^Hus is that the fact,that life is absurd is not a reason for ending it* overcome absurdity by giving his am life a human, not a existence, Camus argues, is to treat having as it every aspect of human j;& J^'by 'love', is in a sense broached by The Fall and perhaps by the novel Camus left"hi* ^afh- ^ &fSt ^sL'- ' - u^..a - *-	tU'ic	1""rt unfinished novel Camus left af his^Varh Th. g,v.<Bu under political pressure in its second incarnation as Lt r' retmblicain in early 1941. In 1943, when The Outsider and The Ramus'a well-known figure m Occupied .France, he joined"the^ fluid, [ractiou$ world of liberation France p Camus into -22H*fterou,s "political dogp-figJh.ts wliicii ousnea him ever lonvara the search for ahstrart and p-pnerai orinciDies ol tusuce in _the leading anti-ComrnTinist intellectual in Kraw-iTleafrl


SLre iust as human as anyone else, nimseil included — or arather, tKa.t liof a Dostoevskian set-piece scene, Clamence's self-abasement e, the successful a
nd narcissistic lawyer, is in no
«*& ,also a. moral apotheosis, since he now lives in accordance and that, as Simone de Beauvoir claimed in the epigraph to


er origw« •*.—-v» ssoph.istica.ted to argue that the existence of plague proves rr lit Onus's initial training in Christian theology, in his masteir's thesis on St Augustine; it is also because it spoke eloquentlyin mid-twentieth century, straining to free themselves from the mental and moral authority of me am : 3 authority of the church. set in the Algerian coastal city ofOran, which Camus knew

disease ""of'tato transmitted, to humans by a soecific flea, JVwftylfa jmtus. Infected humans are neither infectious nor contagious, so they cannot pass the disease on to anyone else. Itoitl Defoe's journal 0/ h Plagit fm (1722), a lastly fictional Daniel Defoe's Journa/ of iht Plagui liar (1722), a largely tonal literaiy renunkences, and on a barely perceptible play on literary reminiscences, and on a barely perceptible play on Camus's novel tackles the obvious question of what we might lior stop-over there, on'5 and fr -October 1954, which he spent in the city's art museums, not in its baircbrothi Works like Th« Plague awi The Fall are of course inexhaustra ible in the meanings that they suggest Much of the plz health reasons (it has particularly dry, clean mountain air).

The M.essftge of Albert Camus CamxtsV three-fevered > lifework, tells us ■ simply that lifer is t lift « «■ •	«	» •	11 i	i	i

Camtrs's' threc-kyered1 Jifework; tells us simply that life is The.	which belongs to the first phase T<foe	®f •Sis)f>hus> which belongs to the first phase Of worth* living because it is all that we have. As an essay lowever, it is entirely persuask L®.?3

living a life and living it well is more important, Camus demonstrates, than knowing what it means.

The Plague is most easily approached as a parable about the 'rman ( Irrvmstinn iV '-ranrp ' i"v» 'cmp rr ciom» nnr»T German Occupation ol' /ranee, ^"ne 'state ol siege •which the Tesidents oi" Qran are put is_easi.lv decoded lessresponse of many Frenchmen (including large sections of the established church and the implicitly pro-Nazi regime that desperate attempts to flee 'Oran' might also be read a< u, Rieux and their hetoers to brinz parablToT 'practical resistance',joi to odea:
